Forster, departing in his turn. Passepartout remained alone in the house in Saville Row.
Chapter II
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS CONVINCED THAT HE HAS AT LAST
FOUND HIS IDEAL
“Faith,” muttered Passepartout, somewhat flurried, “I’ve seen people at Madame Tussaud’s as
lively as my new master!”
Madame Tussaud’s “people,” let it be said, are of wax, and are much visited in London; speech is
all that is wanting to make them human.
During his brief interview with Mr. Fogg, Passepartout had been carefully observing him. He
appeared to be a man about forty years of age, with fine, handsome features, and a tall, well-
shaped figure; his hair and whiskers were light, his forehead compact and unwrinkled, his face
rather pale, his teeth magnificent. His countenance possessed in the highest degree what
physiognomists call “repose in action,” a quality of those who act rather than talk. Calm and
phlegmatic, with a clear eye, Mr. Fogg seemed a perfect type of that English composure which
Angelica Kauffmann has so skilfully represented on canvas. Seen in the various phases of his
daily life, he gave the idea of being perfectly well-balanced, as exactly regulated as a Leroy
chronometer. Phileas Fogg was, indeed, exactitude personified, and this was betrayed even in
the expression of his very hands and feet; for in men, as well as in animals, the limbs themselves
are expressive of the passions.
He was so exact that he was never in a hurry, was always ready, and was economical alike of his
steps and his motions. He never took one step too many, and always went to his destination by
the shortest cut; he made no superfluous gestures, and was never seen to be moved or agitated.
He was the most deliberate person in the world, yet always reached his destination at the exact
moment.
He lived alone, and, so to speak, outside of every social relation; and as he knew that in this
world account must be taken of friction, and that friction retards, he never rubbed against
anybody.
As for Passepartout, he was a true Parisian of Paris. Since he had abandoned his own country
for England, taking service as a valet, he had in vain searched for a master after his own heart.
Passepartout was by no means one of those pert dunces depicted by Moliere with a bold gaze
and a nose held high in the air; he was an honest fellow, with a pleasant face, lips a trifle
protruding, soft-mannered and serviceable, with a good round head, such as one likes to see on
the shoulders of a friend. His eyes were blue, his complexion rubicund, his figure almost portly
and well-built, his body muscular, and his physical powers fully developed by the exercises of his
younger days. His brown hair was somewhat tumbled; for, while the ancient sculptors are said
to have known eighteen methods of arranging Minerva’s tresses, Passepartout was familiar with
but one of dressing his own: three strokes of a large-tooth comb completed his toilet.


