It would be rash to predict how Passepartout’s lively nature would agree with Mr. Fogg.
It was impossible to tell whether the new servant would turn out as absolutely methodical
as his master required; experience alone could solve the question. Passepartout had
been a sort of vagrant in his early years, and now yearned for repose; but so far he had
failed to find it, though he had already served in ten English houses. But he could not
take root in any of these; with chagrin, he found his masters invariably whimsical and
irregular, constantly running about the country, or on the look-out for adventure. His last
master, young Lord Longferry, Member of Parliament, after passing his nights in the
Haymarket taverns, was too often brought home in the morning on policemen’s
shoulders. Passepartout, desirous of respecting the gentleman whom he served,
ventured a mild remonstrance on such conduct; which, being ill-received, he took his
leave. Hearing that Mr. Phileas Fogg was looking for a servant, and that his life was one
of unbroken regularity, that he neither travelled nor stayed from home overnight, he felt
sure that this would be the place he was after. He presented himself, and was accepted,
as has been seen.
At half-past eleven, then, Passepartout found himself alone in the house in Saville Row.
He began its inspection without delay, scouring it from cellar to garret. So clean, well-
arranged, solemn a mansion pleased him; it seemed to him like a snail’s shell, lighted
and warmed by gas, which sufficed for both these purposes. When Passepartout
reached the second story he recognised at once the room which he was to inhabit, and
he was well satisfied with it. Electric bells and speaking-tubes afforded communication
with the lower stories; while on the mantel stood an electric clock, precisely like that in
Mr. Fogg’s bedchamber, both beating the same second at the same instant. “That’s
good, that’ll do,” said Passepartout to himself.
He suddenly observed, hung over the clock, a card which, upon inspection, proved to be
a programme of the daily routine of the house. It comprised all that was required of the
servant, from eight in the morning, exactly at which hour Phileas Fogg rose, till half-past
eleven, when he left the house for the Reform Club—all the details of service, the tea
and toast at twenty-three minutes past eight, the shaving-water at thirty-seven minutes
past nine, and the toilet at twenty minutes before ten. Everything was regulated and
foreseen that was to be done from half-past eleven a.m. till midnight, the hour at which
the methodical gentleman retired.
Mr. Fogg’s wardrobe was amply supplied and in the best taste. Each pair of trousers,
coat, and vest bore a number, indicating the time of year and season at which they were
in turn to be laid out for wearing; and the same system was applied to the master’s
shoes. In short, the house in Saville Row, which must have been a very temple of
disorder and unrest under the illustrious but dissipated Sheridan, was cosiness, comfort,
and method idealised. There was no study, nor were there books, which would have
been quite useless to Mr. Fogg; for at the Reform two libraries, one of general literature
and the other of law and politics, were at his service. A moderate-sized safe stood in his
bedroom, constructed so as to defy fire as well as burglars; but Passepartout found
neither arms nor hunting weapons anywhere; everything betrayed the most tranquil and
peaceable habits.


