knees, his body straight, his head erect; he was steadily watching a complicated
clock which indicated the hours, the minutes, the seconds, the days, the
months, and the years. At exactly half-past eleven Mr. Fogg would, according
to his daily habit, quit Saville Row, and repair to the Reform.
A rap at this moment sounded on the door of the cosy apartment where Phileas
Fogg was seated, and James Forster, the dismissed servant, appeared.
“The new servant,” said he.
A young man of thirty advanced and bowed.
“You are a Frenchman, I believe,” asked Phileas Fogg, “and your name is John?”
“Jean, if monsieur pleases,” replied the newcomer, “Jean Passepartout, a
surname which has clung to me because I have a natural aptness for going out
of one business into another. I believe I’m honest, monsieur, but, to be
outspoken, I’ve had several trades. I’ve been an itinerant singer, a circus-rider,
when I used to vault like Leotard, and dance on a rope like Blondin. Then I got
to be a professor of gymnastics, so as to make better use of my talents; and
then I was a sergeant fireman at Paris, and assisted at many a big fire. But I
quitted France five years ago, and, wishing to taste the sweets of domestic life,
took service as a valet here in England. Finding myself out of place, and
hearing that Monsieur Phileas Fogg was the most exact and settled gentleman
in the United Kingdom, I have come to monsieur in the hope of living with him a
tranquil life, and forgetting even the name of Passepartout.”
“Passepartout suits me,” responded Mr. Fogg. “You are well recommended to
me; I hear a good report of you. You know my conditions?”
“Yes, monsieur.”
“Good! What time is it?”
“Twenty-two minutes after eleven,” returned Passepartout, drawing an
enormous silver watch from the depths of his pocket.
“You are too slow,” said Mr. Fogg.
“Pardon me, monsieur, it is impossible—”
“You are four minutes too slow. No matter; it’s enough to mention the error.
Now from this moment, twenty-nine minutes after eleven, a.m., this
Wednesday, 2nd October, you are in my service.”
Phileas Fogg got up, took his hat in his left hand, put it on his head with an
automatic motion, and went off without a word.
Passepartout heard the street door shut once; it was his new master going out.
He heard it shut again; it was his predecessor, James


