‘David Copperfield all over!’ cried Miss Betsey. ‘David Copperfield from head to foot!
Calls a house a rookery when there’s not a rook near it, and takes the birds on trust,
because he sees the nests!’
‘Mr. Copperfield,’ returned my mother, ‘is dead, and if you dare to speak unkindly of him
to me—’
My poor dear mother, I suppose, had some momentary intention of committing an
assault and battery upon my aunt, who could easily have settled her with one hand,
even if my mother had been in far better training for such an encounter than she was
that evening. But it passed with the action of rising from her chair; and she sat down
again very meekly, and fainted.
When she came to herself, or when Miss Betsey had restored her, whichever it was, she
found the latter standing at the window. The twilight was by this time shading down into
darkness; and dimly as they saw each other, they could not have done that without the
aid of the fire.
‘Well?’ said Miss Betsey, coming back to her chair, as if she had only been taking a
casual look at the prospect; ‘and when do you expect—’
‘I am all in a tremble,’ faltered my mother. ‘I don’t know what’s the matter. I shall die, I
am sure!’
‘No, no, no,’ said Miss Betsey. ‘Have some tea.’
‘Oh dear me, dear me, do you think it will do me any good?’ cried my mother in a
helpless manner.
‘Of course it will,’ said Miss Betsey. ‘It’s nothing but fancy. What do you call your girl?’
‘I don’t know that it will be a girl, yet, ma’am,’ said my mother innocently.
‘Bless the Baby!’ exclaimed Miss Betsey, unconsciously quoting the second sentiment of
the pincushion in the drawer upstairs, but applying it to my mother instead of me, ‘I don’t
mean that. I mean your servant-girl.’
‘Peggotty,’ said my mother.
‘Peggotty!’ repeated Miss Betsey, with some indignation. ‘Do you mean to say, child, that
any human being has gone into a Christian church, and got herself named Peggotty?’
‘It’s her surname,’ said my mother, faintly. ‘Mr. Copperfield called her by it, because her
Christian name was the same as mine.’
‘Here! Peggotty!’ cried Miss Betsey, opening the parlour door. ‘Tea. Your mistress is a
little unwell. Don’t dawdle.’


