My mother couldn’t help it notwithstanding, so she cried until she had had her cry out.
‘Take off your cap, child,’ said Miss Betsey, ‘and let me see you.’
My mother was too much afraid of her to refuse compliance with this odd request, if she
had any disposition to do so. Therefore she did as she was told, and did it with such
nervous hands that her hair (which was luxuriant and beautiful) fell all about her face.
‘Why, bless my heart!’ exclaimed Miss Betsey. ‘You are a very Baby!’
My mother was, no doubt, unusually youthful in appearance even for her years; she
hung her head, as if it were her fault, poor thing, and said, sobbing, that indeed she was
afraid she was but a childish widow, and would be but a childish mother if she lived. In a
short pause which ensued, she had a fancy that she felt Miss Betsey touch her hair, and
that with no ungentle hand; but, looking at her, in her timid hope, she found that lady
sitting with the skirt of her dress tucked up, her hands folded on one knee, and her feet
upon the fender, frowning at the fire.
‘In the name of Heaven,’ said Miss Betsey, suddenly, ‘why Rookery?’
‘Do you mean the house, ma’am?’ asked my mother.
‘Why Rookery?’ said Miss Betsey. ‘Cookery would have been more to the purpose, if you
had had any practical ideas of life, either of you.’
‘The name was Mr. Copperfield’s choice,’ returned my mother. ‘When he bought the
house, he liked to think that there were rooks about it.’
The evening wind made such a disturbance just now, among some tall old elm-trees at
the bottom of the garden, that neither my mother nor Miss Betsey could forbear
glancing that way. As the elms bent to one another, like giants who were whispering
secrets, and after a few seconds of such repose, fell into a violent flurry, tossing their
wild arms about, as if their late confidences were really too wicked for their peace of
mind, some weatherbeaten ragged old rooks’-nests, burdening their higher branches,
swung like wrecks upon a stormy sea.
‘Where are the birds?’ asked Miss Betsey.
‘The—?’ My mother had been thinking of something else.
‘The rooks—what has become of them?’ asked Miss Betsey.
‘There have not been any since we have lived here,’ said my mother. ‘We thought—Mr.
Copperfield thought—it was quite a large rookery; but the nests were very old ones, and
the birds have deserted them a long while.’


