presumption to go ‘meandering’ about the world. It was in vain to represent to her that
some conveniences, tea perhaps included, resulted from this objectionable practice.
She always returned, with greater emphasis and with an instinctive knowledge of the
strength of her objection, ‘Let us have no meandering.’
Not to meander myself, at present, I will go back to my birth.
I was born at Blunderstone, in Suffolk, or ‘there by’, as they say in Scotland. I was a
posthumous child. My father’s eyes had closed upon the light of this world six months,
when mine opened on it. There is something strange to me, even now, in the reflection
that he never saw me; and something stranger yet in the shadowy remembrance that I
have of my first childish associations with his white grave-stone in the churchyard, and of
the indefinable compassion I used to feel for it lying out alone there in the dark night,
when our little parlour was warm and bright with fire and candle, and the doors of our
house were—almost cruelly, it seemed to me sometimes—bolted and locked against it.
An aunt of my father’s, and consequently a great-aunt of mine, of whom I shall have
more to relate by and by, was the principal magnate of our family. Miss Trotwood, or Miss
Betsey, as my poor mother always called her, when she sufficiently overcame her dread
of this formidable personage to mention her at all (which was seldom), had been
married to a husband younger than herself, who was very handsome, except in the
sense of the homely adage, ‘handsome is, that handsome does’—for he was strongly
suspected of having beaten Miss Betsey, and even of having once, on a disputed
question of supplies, made some hasty but determined arrangements to throw her out of
a two pair of stairs’ window. These evidences of an incompatibility of temper induced
Miss Betsey to pay him off, and effect a separation by mutual consent. He went to India
with his capital, and there, according to a wild legend in our family, he was once seen
riding on an elephant, in company with a Baboon; but I think it must have been a
Baboo—or a Begum. Anyhow, from India tidings of his death reached home, within ten
years. How they affected my aunt, nobody knew; for immediately upon the separation,
she took her maiden name again, bought a cottage in a hamlet on the sea-coast a long
way off, established herself there as a single woman with one servant, and was
understood to live secluded, ever afterwards, in an inflexible retirement.
My father had once been a favourite of hers, I believe; but she was mortally affronted by
his marriage, on the ground that my mother was ‘a wax doll’. She had never seen my
mother, but she knew her to be not yet twenty. My father and Miss Betsey never met
again. He was double my mother’s age when he married, and of but a delicate
constitution. He died a year afterwards, and, as I have said, six months before I came
into the world.
This was the state of matters, on the afternoon of, what I may be excused for calling, that
eventful and important Friday. I can make no claim therefore to have known, at that
time, how matters stood; or to have any remembrance, founded on the evidence of my
own senses, of what follows.


