My mother was sitting by the fire, but poorly in health, and very low in spirits, looking at it
through her tears, and desponding heavily about herself and the fatherless little stranger, who was
already welcomed by some grosses of prophetic pins, in a drawer upstairs, to a world not at all
excited on the subject of his arrival; my mother, I say, was sitting by the fire, that bright, windy
March afternoon, very timid and sad, and very doubtful of ever coming alive out of the trial that
was before her, when, lifting her eyes as she dried them, to the window opposite, she saw a
strange lady coming up the garden.
My mother had a sure foreboding at the second glance, that it was Miss Betsey. The setting sun
was glowing on the strange lady, over the garden-fence, and she came walking up to the door with
a fell rigidity of figure and composure of countenance that could have belonged to nobody else.
When she reached the house, she gave another proof of her identity. My father had often hinted
that she seldom conducted herself like any ordinary Christian; and now, instead of ringing the
bell, she came and looked in at that identical window, pressing the end of her nose against the
glass to that extent, that my poor dear mother used to say it became perfectly flat and white in a
moment.
She gave my mother such a turn, that I have always been convinced I am indebted to Miss Betsey
for having been born on a Friday.
My mother had left her chair in her agitation, and gone behind it in the corner. Miss Betsey,
looking round the room, slowly and inquiringly, began on the other side, and carried her eyes on,
like a Saracen’s Head in a Dutch clock, until they reached my mother. Then she made a frown
and a gesture to my mother, like one who was accustomed to be obeyed, to come and open the
door. My mother went.
‘Mrs. David Copperfield, I think,’ said Miss Betsey; the emphasis referring, perhaps, to my
mother’s mourning weeds, and her condition.
‘Yes,’ said my mother, faintly.
‘Miss Trotwood,’ said the visitor. ‘You have heard of her, I dare say?’
My mother answered she had had that pleasure. And she had a disagreeable consciousness of not
appearing to imply that it had been an overpowering pleasure.
‘Now you see her,’ said Miss Betsey. My mother bent her head, and begged her to walk in.
They went into the parlour my mother had come from, the fire in the best room on the other side
of the passage not being lighted—not having been lighted, indeed, since my father’s funeral; and
when they were both seated, and Miss Betsey said nothing, my mother, after vainly trying to
restrain herself, began to cry. ‘Oh tut, tut, tut!’ said Miss Betsey, in a hurry. ‘Don’t do that! Come,
come!’


