I
ENGINEERING AND THE ENGINEER
Several years ago, at the regular annual meeting of one of the major engineering societies, the
president of the society, in the formal address with which he opened the meeting, gave expression
to a thought so startling that the few laymen who were seated in the auditorium fairly gasped.
What the president said in effect was that, since engineers had got the world into war, it was the
duty of engineers to get the world out of war. As a thought, it probably reflected the secret
opinion of every engineer present, for, however innocent of intended wrong-doing engineers
assuredly are as a group in their work of scientific investigation and development, the statement
that engineers were responsible for the conflict then raging in Europe was absolute truth.
I mention this merely to bring to the reader’s attention the tremendous power which engineers
wield in world affairs.
The profession of engineering—which, by the way, is merely the adapting of discoveries in
science and art to the uses of mankind—is a peculiarly isolated one. But very little is known
about it among those outside of the profession. Laymen know something about law, a little about
medicine, quite a lot—nowadays—about metaphysics. But laymen know nothing about
engineering. Indeed, a source of common amusement among engineers is the peculiar fact that the
average layman cannot differentiate between the man who runs a locomotive and the man who
designs a locomotive. In ordinary parlance both are called engineers. Yet there is a difference
between them—a difference as between day and night. For one merely operates the results of the
creative genius of the other. This almost universal ignorance as to what constitutes an engineer
serves to show to what broad extent the profession of engineering is isolated.
Yet it is a wonderful profession. I say this with due regard for all other professions. For one
cannot but ponder the fact that, if engineers started the greatest war the world has ever known—
and engineers as a body freely admit that if they did not start it they at least made it possible—
they also stopped it, thereby proving themselves possessed of a power greater than that of any
other class of professional men—diplomats and lawyers and divinities not excepted.
That engineering is a force fraught with stupendous possibilities, therefore, nobody can very well
deny. That it is a force generally exercised for good—despite the World War—I myself, as an
engineer, can truly testify. With some fifteen years spent on the creative end of the work—the
drafting and designing end—I have yet to see, with but two or three rare exceptions, the genius of
engineers turned into any but noble channels.
Thus, engineering is not only a wonderful profession, with the activities of its followers of utmost
importance, but also it is a profession the individual work of whose pioneers, from Watt to


