However, not all of our engineers have gone upward by the overalls route. Nor is it at all
necessary to do this in order to attain to success. The high-school graduate, entering a college of
engineering, has an equal chance. Some maintain that he has a better chance. Certain it is that he
is better qualified to cope with the heavier theoretical problems which come up every day in the
average engineer’s work. There is a place for him, side by side with the practical man, and his
knowledge will be everywhere respected and sought. But a combination of the theoretical and the
practical, as has frequently been declared, makes for the complete engineer. Some get the
practical side first and the theoretical side later; some get the theoretical side first and the
practical side later. It matters little—save only that he who gets the practical side first is earning
his way while getting it, while the man who goes to college is in the majority of cases being
supported from outside sources while getting what he wants. But in the end it balances. Merely,
the “full” engineer must have both. Having both, he has, literally, the world within his grasp. For
engineering is—to repeat—the adapting of discoveries in science and art to the uses of mankind.
And both art and science reflect and are drawn from Mother Nature.
There is still a great scarcity of engineers. All branches feel the need—civil, mechanical, mining,
chemical, automotive, electrical—the call goes out. It is a call just now, owing to the vast
reconstruction period confronting the world, lifted in strident voice. Engineers everywhere are
needed, which in part accounts for the liberal salaries offered for experienced men. The demand
greatly exceeds the supply, and gives promise of exceeding it for a number of years to come. All
manufacturing-plants, all mining enterprises, of which of both there are thousands upon
thousands, utilize each from one to many hundreds of engineers. Some plants make use of three
or four different kinds—mechanical, civil, electrical, industrial—some only one. But not a plant
of any size but that has need for at least one engineer, and engineers are scarce. Therefore
opportunities are ample.
To the young man seeking a profession, provided he be of a certain type—possessed of certain
inherent qualities, the nature of which I shall set forth in the following chapter—engineering
offers satisfactory money returns and—more satisfactory still—a satisfactory life. The work is
creative from beginning to end; it has to do frequently with movement—always a source of
delight to mankind; a source having its beginnings in earliest infancy, and it is essentially a work
of service. To build a bridge, to design an automatic machine, to locate and bring to the surface
earth’s wealth in minerals—surely this is service of a most gratifying kind.
And it pays. The arts rarely pay; science always pays. And engineering being a science, a science
in the pursuit of which also man is offered opportunities for the exercise of his creative instincts,
like art, is therefore doubly gratifying as a life’s work. I know—and it will bear repeating—no
other profession that holds so much of bigness and of fullness of life generally. Engineers
themselves reflect it. Usually robust, always active, generally optimistic, engineers as a group
swing through life—and have swung through life from the beginnings of the profession—without
thought of publicity, for instance, or need or


