work. At seventeen he was transferred to the roundhouse; at nineteen he
apprenticed himself to the machinist trade. Engineering? He did not know what
it was, really. Merely he saw his way clear to earning a livelihood and went after
it. He was miserably educated. His knowledge of mathematics embraced
arithmetic up to fractions, at which point it faded off into blissful
“nothingness”—as our New-Thoughtists say. But he had an inquiring mind and
a proper will to succeed. While serving his three years in the shop he bought a
course in a correspondence school and studied nights, taking up, among other
things, the subject of mechanical drafting. When twenty-two years of age he
applied for, and got, a position as draftsman in a small company developing a
motorcycle. He was well on his way upward.
He spent a year with this company. He learned much of value to him not only
about mathematics, but about engineering as a whole as well. One day he
decided that the field was restricted—at least, too much so for him—and he left
and went with a Westinghouse organization in Pittsburgh. His salary was in the
neighborhood of a hundred and ten dollars a month. He remained with the
company two years as a designer, and then, having saved up sufficient funds to
meet his needs, went to college, taking special work—physics and chemistry
and mathematics. He remained in school two years. When he came out, instead
of returning to the drafting-room and the theoretical end of the work, he donned
overalls once more and went to work in the shop as an erecting man. Two years
afterward he was chief operating engineer in a small cement-plant in the
Southwest, his salary being three thousand dollars a year. A year of this and he
returned East, at a salary of four thousand dollars a year, as operating engineer
of a larger plant. Then came a better offer, with one of the largest, if not the very
largest, steel-plants in the country, as superintendent of power, at a salary of
five thousand dollars a year. When the war broke out, or rather when this
country became involved in the war, my friend Smith, at a salary of ten
thousand dollars a year, became associated with a staff of engineers brought
together into a corporation manufacturing shells. And all before he was barely
in his thirties!
A young man still, what lies ahead of him can readily be surmised. Smith will
follow engineering on salary until he is probably forty, when he will enter upon
a consulting practice, and at fifty retire with sufficient money to keep him in
comfort the remainder of his days. Nor will he be an exception, as I have stated
in the opening paragraph. The profession is crowded with men who have
worked up from equally humble beginnings. Indeed, one of the foremost
efficiency engineers in the country to-day began as an apprentice in a foundry,
while another, fully as well known in efficiency work, began life in the United
States navy as a machinist’s mate. Automobile engineers, whose names, many
of them, are household words, in particular have gone big in the profession and
from very obscure beginnings. It is not stretching the obvious to say that the
majority of these men, had they entered upon any other work, would never have
been heard from nor have attained to their present wealth and affluence. Smith
was just one of many in a profession offering liberal opportunities. The
opportunities still exist and in just as large a proportion as they ever existed. It
remains but for the young man to decide. The profession itself, almost, will take
care of him afterward.


