faith rest upon? What is to be said of inspiration, and authority, and the essential
attributes of a church? These, and other questions of the most essential religious
importance, as the nature and signification of the doctrines of the Trinity, of the
Incarnation of Christ, of Redemption, of Atonement, discussions as to the relations
between faith and morals, and on the old, inevitable enigmas of necessity and liberty,
all more or less entered into that mixed whirl of earnest inquiry and flippant
scepticism which is summed up under the general name of the Deistic Controversy.
For it is not hard to see how intimately the secondary controversies of the time were
connected with that main and central one, which not only engrossed so much
attention on the part of theologians and students, but became a subject of too
general conversation in every coffee-house and place of public resort.
In mental, as well as in physical science, it seems to be a law that force cannot be
expended in one direction without some corresponding relaxation of it in another.
And thus the disproportionate energies which were diverted to the intellectual side of
religion were exercised at some cost to its practical part. Bishops were writing in their
libraries, when otherwise they might have been travelling round their dioceses. Men
were pondering over abstract questions of faith and morality, who else might have
been engaged in planning or carrying out plans for the more active propagation of
the faith, or a more general improvement in popular morals. The defenders of
Christianity were searching out evidences, and battling with deistical objections,
while they slackened in their fight against the more palpable assaults of the world
and the flesh. Pulpits sounded with theological arguments where admonitions were
urgently needed. Above all, reason was called to decide upon questions before
which man’s reason stands impotent; and imagination and emotion, those great
auxiliaries to all deep religious feeling, were bid to stand rebuked in her presence, as
hinderers of the rational faculty, and upstart pretenders to rights which were not
theirs. ‘Enthusiasm’ was frowned down, and no small part of the light and fire of
religion fell with it.
Yet an age in which great questions were handled by great men could not be either
an unfruitful or an uninteresting one. It might be unfruitful, in the sense of reaping no
great harvest of results; and it might be uninteresting, in respect of not having much
to show upon the surface, and exhibiting no great variety of active life. But much
good fruit for the future was being developed and matured; and no one, who cares to
see how the present grows out of the past, will readily allow that the religious thought
and the religious action of the eighteenth century are deficient in interest to our times.
Our debt is greater than many are inclined to acknowledge. People see clearly that
the Church of that age was, in many respects, in an undoubtedly unsatisfactory
condition, sleepy and full of abuses, and are sometimes apt to think that the
Evangelical revival (the expression being used in its widest sense) was the one
redeeming feature of it. And as in theological and ecclesiastical thought, in
philosophy, in art, in poetry, the general tendency has been reactionary, the students
and writers of the eighteenth century have in many respects scarcely received their
due share of appreciation. Moreover, negative results make little display. There is not
much to show for the earnest toil that has very likely been spent in arriving at them;
and a great deal of the intellectual labour of the last century was of this kind. Reason
had been more


