The claim which the intellectual and religious life of England in the eighteenth century has
upon our interest has been much more generally acknowledged of late years than was the
case heretofore. There had been, for the most part, a disposition to pass it over somewhat
slightly, as though the whole period were a prosaic and uninteresting one. Every generation
is apt to depreciate the age which has so long preceded it as to have no direct bearing on
present modes of life, but is yet not sufficiently distant as to have emerged into the full
dignity of history. Besides, it cannot be denied that the records of the eighteenth century
are, with two or three striking exceptions, not of a kind to stir the imagination. It was not a
pictorial age; neither was it one of ardent feeling or energetic movement. Its special merits
were not very obvious, and its prevailing faults had nothing dazzling in them, nothing that
could be in any way called splendid; on the contrary, in its weaker points there was a
distinctly ignoble element. The mainsprings of the religious, as well as of the political, life of
the country were relaxed. In both one and the other the high feeling of faith was enervated;
and this deficiency was sensibly felt in a lowering of general tone, both in the domain of
intellect and in that of practice. The spirit of feudalism and of the old chivalry had all but
departed, but had left a vacuum which was not yet supplied. As for loyalty, the half-hearted
feeling of necessity or expedience, which for more than half the century was the main
support of the German dynasty, was something different not in degree only, but in kind,
from that which had upheld the throne in time past. Jacobitism, on the other hand, was not
strong enough to be more than a faction; and the Republican party, who had once been
equal to the Royalists in fervour of enthusiasm, and superior to them in intensity of purpose,
were now wholly extinct. The country increased rapidly in strength and in material
prosperity; its growth was uninterrupted; its resources continued to develop; its political
constitution gained in power and consolidation. But there was a deficiency of disinterested
principle. There was an open field for the operation of such sordid motives and debasing
tactics as those which disgraced Walpole’s lengthened administration.
In the following chapters there will be only too frequent occasion to refer to a somewhat
corresponding state of things in the religious life of the country. For two full centuries the
land had laboured under the throes of the Reformation. Even when William III. died, it could
scarcely be said that England had decisively settled the form which her National Church
should take. The ‘Church in danger’ cries of Queen Anne’s reign, and the bitter war of
pamphlets, were outward indications that suspense was not yet completely over, and that
both friends and enemies felt they had still occasion to calculate the chances alike of
Presbyterianism and of the Papacy. But when George I. ascended the throne in peace, it was
at last generally realised that the ‘Settlement’ of which so much had been spoken was now
effectually attained. Church and State were so far secured from change, that their defenders
might rest from anxiety. It was not a wholesome rest that followed. Long-standing disputes
and the old familiar controversies were almost lulled to silence, but in their place a sluggish
calm rapidly spread over the Church, not only over the established National Church, but over
it and also over every community of Nonconformists. It is remarkable how closely the
beginning of the season of spiritual lassitude corresponds with the accession of the first
George. The country had never altogether recovered from the reaction of lax


