gave rise to the Deistic and its attendant controversies mark with tolerable
definiteness the chief period of transition.
The Evangelical revival, both that which is chiefly connected with the name of the
Wesleys and of Whitefield, and that which was carried on more exclusively within the
Church of England, closely corresponded in many of its details to what had often
occurred before in the history of the Christian Church. But it had also a special
connection with the controversies which preceded it. When minds had become
tranquillised through the subsidence of discussions which had threatened to
overthrow their faith, they were the more prepared to listen with attention and respect
to the stirring calls of the Evangelical preacher. The very sense of weariness, now
that long controversy had at last come to its termination, tended to give a more
entirely practical form to the new religious movement. And although many of its
leaders were men who had not come to their prime till the Deistical controversy was
almost over, and who would probably have viewed the strife, if it had still been
raging, with scarcely any other feeling than one of alarmed concern, this was at all
events not the case with John Wesley. There are tolerably clear signs that it had
materially modified the character of his opinions. The train of thought which produced
the younger Dodwell’s ‘Christianity not Founded upon Argument’ — a book of which
people scarcely knew, when it appeared, whether it was a serious blow to the Deist
cause, or a formidable assistance to it — considerably influenced Wesley’s mind, as it
also did that of William Law and his followers. He entirely repudiated the mysticism
which at one time had begun to attract him; but, like the German pietists, who were in
some sense the religious complement of Rationalism, he never ceased to be
comparatively indifferent to orthodoxy, so long as the man had the witness of the
Spirit proving itself in works of faith. In whatever age of the Church Wesley had lived,
he would have been no doubt an active agent in the holy work of evangelisation. But
opposed as he was to prevailing influences, he was yet a man of his time. We can
hardly fancy the John Wesley whom we know living in any other century than his
own. Spending the most plastic, perhaps also the most reflective period of his life in a
chief centre of theological activity, he was not unimpressed by the storm of argument
which was at that time going on around him. It was uncongenial to his temper, but it
did not fail to leave upon him its lasting mark.
The Deistical and other theological controversies of the earlier half of the century,
and the Wesleyan and Evangelical revival in its latter half, are quite sufficient in
themselves to make the Church history of the period exceedingly important. They are
beyond doubt its principal and leading events. But there was much more besides in
the religious life of the country that is well worthy of note. The Revolution which had
so lately preceded the opening of the century, and the far more pregnant and
eventful Revolution which convulsed Europe at its close, had both of them many
bearings, though of course in very different ways, upon the development of religious
and ecclesiastical thought in this country. One of the first and principal effects of the
change of dynasty in 1688 had been to give an immense impetus to Protestant
feeling. This was something altogether different in kind from the Puritanism which
had entered so largely into all the earlier history of that century. It was hardly a
theological movement; neither was it one that bore primarily and directly upon
personal religion. It was, so to say, a


