The claim which the intellectual and religious life of England in the eighteenth century has
upon our interest has been much more generally acknowledged of late years than was the case
heretofore. There had been, for the most part, a disposition to pass it over somewhat slightly,
as though the whole period were a prosaic and uninteresting one. Every generation is apt to
depreciate the age which has so long preceded it as to have no direct bearing on present
modes of life, but is yet not sufficiently distant as to have emerged into the full dignity of
history. Besides, it cannot be denied that the records of the eighteenth century are, with two
or three striking exceptions, not of a kind to stir the imagination. It was not a pictorial age;
neither was it one of ardent feeling or energetic movement. Its special merits were not very
obvious, and its prevailing faults had nothing dazzling in them, nothing that could be in any
way called splendid; on the contrary, in its weaker points there was a distinctly ignoble
element. The mainsprings of the religious, as well as of the political, life of the country were
relaxed. In both one and the other the high feeling of faith was enervated; and this deficiency
was sensibly felt in a lowering of general tone, both in the domain of intellect and in that of
practice. The spirit of feudalism and of the old chivalry had all but departed, but had left a
vacuum which was not yet supplied. As for loyalty, the half-hearted feeling of necessity or
expedience, which for more than half the century was the main support of the German
dynasty, was something different not in degree only, but in kind, from that which had upheld
the throne in time past. Jacobitism, on the other hand, was not strong enough to be more than
a faction; and the Republican party, who had once been equal to the Royalists in fervour of
enthusiasm, and superior to them in intensity of purpose, were now wholly extinct. The
country increased rapidly in strength and in material prosperity; its growth was uninterrupted;
its resources continued to develop; its political constitution gained in power and consolidation.
But there was a deficiency of disinterested principle. There was an open field for the operation
of such sordid motives and debasing tactics as those which disgraced Walpole’s lengthened
administration.
In the following chapters there will be only too frequent occasion to refer to a somewhat
corresponding state of things in the religious life of the country. For two full centuries the land
had laboured under the throes of the Reformation. Even when William III. died, it could
scarcely be said that England had decisively settled the form which her National Church
should take. The ‘Church in danger’ cries of Queen Anne’s reign, and the bitter war of
pamphlets, were outward indications that suspense was not yet completely over, and that both
friends and enemies felt they had still occasion to calculate the chances alike of
Presbyterianism and of the Papacy. But when George I. ascended the throne in peace, it was
at last generally realised that the ‘Settlement’ of which so much had been spoken was now
effectually attained. Church and State were so far secured from change, that their defenders
might rest from anxiety. It was not a wholesome rest that followed. Long-standing disputes
and the old familiar controversies were almost lulled to silence, but in their place a sluggish
calm rapidly spread over the Church, not only over the established National Church, but over
it and also over every community of Nonconformists. It is remarkable how closely the
beginning of the season of spiritual lassitude corresponds with the accession of the first
George. The country had never altogether recovered from the reaction of lax

indifference into which it had fallen after the Restoration. Nevertheless, a good deal had
occurred since that time to keep the minds of Churchmen, as well as of politicians, awake and
active: and a good deal had been done to stem the tide of immorality which had then broken
over the kingdom. The Church of England was certainly not asleep either in the time of the
Seven Bishops, when James II. was King, or under its Whig rulers at the end of the century.
And in Queen Anne’s time, amid all the virulence of hostile Church parties, there was a
healthy stream of life which made itself very visible in the numerous religious associations
which sprang up everywhere in the great towns. It might seem as if there were a certain
heaviness in the English mind, which requires some outward stimulus to keep alive its zeal.
For so soon as the press of danger ceased, and party strifes abated, with the accession of the
House of Brunswick, Christianity began forthwith to slumber. The trumpet of Wesley and
Whitefield was needed before that unseemly slumber could again be broken.
It will not, however, be forgotten that twice in successive generations the Church of England
had been deprived, through misfortune or through folly, of some of her best men. She had
suffered on either hand. By the ejection of 1602, through a too stringent enforcement of the
new Act of Uniformity, she had lost the services of some of the most devoted of her Puritan
sons, men whose views were in many cases no way distinguishable from those which had been
held without rebuke by some of the most honoured bishops of Elizabeth’s time. By the
ejection of 1689, through what was surely a needless strain upon their allegiance, many high-
minded men of a different order of thought were driven, if not from her communion, at all
events from her ministrations. It was a juncture when the Church could ill afford to be
weakened by the defection of some of the most earnest and disinterested upholders of the
Primitive and Catholic, as contrasted with the more directly Protestant elements of her
Constitution. This twofold drain upon her strength could scarcely have failed to impair the
robust vitality which was soon to be so greatly needed to combat the early beginnings of the
dead resistance of spiritual lethargy.
But this listlessness in most branches of practical religion must partly be attributed to a cause
which gives the history of religious thought in the eighteenth century its principal importance.
In proportion as the Church Constitution approached its final settlement, and as the
controversies, which from the beginning of the Reformation had been unceasingly under
dispute, gradually wore themselves out, new questions came forward, far more profound and
fundamental, and far more important in their speculative and practical bearings, than those
which had attracted so much notice and stirred so much excitement during the two preceding
centuries. The existence of God was scarcely called into question by the boldest doubters; or
such doubts, if they found place at all, were expressed only under the most covert
implications. But, short of this, all the mysteries of religion were scrutinized; all the deep and
hidden things of faith were brought in question, and submitted to the test of reason. Is there
such a thing as a revelation from God to men of Himself and of His will? If so, what is its
nature, its purposes, its limits? What are the attributes of God? What is the meaning of life?
What is man’s hereafter? Does a divine spirit work in man? and if it does, what are its
operations, and how are they distinguishable? What is spirit? and what is matter? What does

faith rest upon? What is to be said of inspiration, and authority, and the essential attributes of
a church? These, and other questions of the most essential religious importance, as the nature
and signification of the doctrines of the Trinity, of the Incarnation of Christ, of Redemption,
of Atonement, discussions as to the relations between faith and morals, and on the old,
inevitable enigmas of necessity and liberty, all more or less entered into that mixed whirl of
earnest inquiry and flippant scepticism which is summed up under the general name of the
Deistic Controversy. For it is not hard to see how intimately the secondary controversies of
the time were connected with that main and central one, which not only engrossed so much
attention on the part of theologians and students, but became a subject of too general
conversation in every coffee-house and place of public resort.
In mental, as well as in physical science, it seems to be a law that force cannot be expended in
one direction without some corresponding relaxation of it in another. And thus the
disproportionate energies which were diverted to the intellectual side of religion were
exercised at some cost to its practical part. Bishops were writing in their libraries, when
otherwise they might have been travelling round their dioceses. Men were pondering over
abstract questions of faith and morality, who else might have been engaged in planning or
carrying out plans for the more active propagation of the faith, or a more general
improvement in popular morals. The defenders of Christianity were searching out evidences,
and battling with deistical objections, while they slackened in their fight against the more
palpable assaults of the world and the flesh. Pulpits sounded with theological arguments where
admonitions were urgently needed. Above all, reason was called to decide upon questions
before which man’s reason stands impotent; and imagination and emotion, those great
auxiliaries to all deep religious feeling, were bid to stand rebuked in her presence, as hinderers
of the rational faculty, and upstart pretenders to rights which were not theirs. ‘Enthusiasm’
was frowned down, and no small part of the light and fire of religion fell with it.
Yet an age in which great questions were handled by great men could not be either an
unfruitful or an uninteresting one. It might be unfruitful, in the sense of reaping no great
harvest of results; and it might be uninteresting, in respect of not having much to show upon
the surface, and exhibiting no great variety of active life. But much good fruit for the future
was being developed and matured; and no one, who cares to see how the present grows out of
the past, will readily allow that the religious thought and the religious action of the eighteenth
century are deficient in interest to our times. Our debt is greater than many are inclined to
acknowledge. People see clearly that the Church of that age was, in many respects, in an
undoubtedly unsatisfactory condition, sleepy and full of abuses, and are sometimes apt to
think that the Evangelical revival (the expression being used in its widest sense) was the one
redeeming feature of it. And as in theological and ecclesiastical thought, in philosophy, in art,
in poetry, the general tendency has been reactionary, the students and writers of the
eighteenth century have in many respects scarcely received their due share of appreciation.
Moreover, negative results make little display. There is not much to show for the earnest toil
that has very likely been spent in arriving at them; and a great deal of the intellectual labour
of the last century was of this kind. Reason had been more

completely emancipated at the Reformation than it was at first at all aware of. Men who were
engaged in battling against certain definite abuses, and certain specified errors, scarcely
discovered at first, nor indeed for long afterwards, that they were in reality contending also for
principles which would affect for the future the whole groundwork of religious conviction.
They were not yet in a position to see that henceforward authority could take only a
secondary place, and that they were installing in its room either reason or a more subtle
spiritual faculty superior even to reason in the perception of spiritual things. It was not until
near the end of the seventeenth century that the mind began to awaken to a full perception of
the freedom it had won – a freedom far more complete in principle than was as yet allowed in
practice. In the eighteenth century this fundamental postulate of the Reformation became for
the first time a prominent, and, to many minds, an absorbing subject of inquiry. For the first
time it was no longer disguised from sight by the incidental interest of its side issues. The
assertors of the supremacy of reason were at first arrogantly, or even insolently, self-confident,
as those who were secure of carrying all before them. Gradually, the wiser of them began to
feel that their ambition must be largely moderated, and that they must be content with far
more negative results than they had at first imagined. The question came to be, what is reason
unable to do? What are its limits? and how is it to be supplemented? An immensity of
learning, and of arguments good and bad, was lavished on either side in the controversy
between the deists and the orthodox. In the end, it may perhaps be said that two axioms were
established, which may sound in our own day like commonplaces, but which were certainly
very insufficiently realised when the controversy began. It was seen on the one hand that
reason was free, and that on the other it was encompassed by limitations against which it
strives in vain. The Deists lost the day. Their objections to revelation fell through; and
Christianity rose again, strengthened rather than weakened by their attack. Yet they had not
laboured in vain, if success may be measured, not by the gaining of an immediate purpose,
but by solid good effected, however contrary in kind to the object proposed. So far as a man
works with a single-hearted desire to win truth, he should rejoice if his very errors are made,
in the hands of an overruling Providence, instrumental in establishing truth. Christianity in
England had arrived in the eighteenth century at one of those periods of revision when it has
become absolutely necessary to examine the foundations of its teaching, at any risk of
temporary disturbance to the faith of individuals. The advantage ultimately gained was
twofold. It was not only that the vital doctrines of Christian faith had been scrutinised both by
friends and enemies, and were felt to have stood the proof. But also defenders of received
doctrine learnt, almost insensibly, very much from its opponents. They became aware – or if
not they, at all events their successors became aware – that orthodoxy must, in some respects,
modify the stringency of its conclusions; that there was need, in other instances, of
disentangling Christian verities from the scholastic refinements which had gradually grown up
around them; and that there were many questions which might safely be left open to debate
without in any way impairing the real defences of Christianity. A sixteenth or seventeenth-
century theologian regarded most religious questions from a standing point widely different in
general character from that of his equal in piety and learning in the eighteenth century. The
circumstances and tone of thought which

gave rise to the Deistic and its attendant controversies mark with tolerable definiteness the
chief period of transition.
The Evangelical revival, both that which is chiefly connected with the name of the Wesleys
and of Whitefield, and that which was carried on more exclusively within the Church of
England, closely corresponded in many of its details to what had often occurred before in the
history of the Christian Church. But it had also a special connection with the controversies
which preceded it. When minds had become tranquillised through the subsidence of
discussions which had threatened to overthrow their faith, they were the more prepared to
listen with attention and respect to the stirring calls of the Evangelical preacher. The very
sense of weariness, now that long controversy had at last come to its termination, tended to
give a more entirely practical form to the new religious movement. And although many of its
leaders were men who had not come to their prime till the Deistical controversy was almost
over, and who would probably have viewed the strife, if it had still been raging, with scarcely
any other feeling than one of alarmed concern, this was at all events not the case with John
Wesley. There are tolerably clear signs that it had materially modified the character of his
opinions. The train of thought which produced the younger Dodwell’s ‘Christianity not
Founded upon Argument’ – a book of which people scarcely knew, when it appeared,
whether it was a serious blow to the Deist cause, or a formidable assistance to it – considerably
influenced Wesley’s mind, as it also did that of William Law and his followers. He entirely
repudiated the mysticism which at one time had begun to attract him; but, like the German
pietists, who were in some sense the religious complement of Rationalism, he never ceased to
be comparatively indifferent to orthodoxy, so long as the man had the witness of the Spirit
proving itself in works of faith. In whatever age of the Church Wesley had lived, he would
have been no doubt an active agent in the holy work of evangelisation. But opposed as he was
to prevailing influences, he was yet a man of his time. We can hardly fancy the John Wesley
whom we know living in any other century than his own. Spending the most plastic, perhaps
also the most reflective period of his life in a chief centre of theological activity, he was not
unimpressed by the storm of argument which was at that time going on around him. It was
uncongenial to his temper, but it did not fail to leave upon him its lasting mark.
The Deistical and other theological controversies of the earlier half of the century, and the
Wesleyan and Evangelical revival in its latter half, are quite sufficient in themselves to make
the Church history of the period exceedingly important. They are beyond doubt its principal
and leading events. But there was much more besides in the religious life of the country that is
well worthy of note. The Revolution which had so lately preceded the opening of the century,
and the far more pregnant and eventful Revolution which convulsed Europe at its close, had
both of them many bearings, though of course in very different ways, upon the development
of religious and ecclesiastical thought in this country. One of the first and principal effects of
the change of dynasty in 1688 had been to give an immense impetus to Protestant feeling.
This was something altogether different in kind from the Puritanism which had entered so
largely into all the earlier history of that century. It was hardly a theological movement;
neither was it one that bore primarily and directly upon personal religion. It was, so to say, a


