indifference into which it had fallen after the Restoration. Nevertheless, a good deal had
occurred since that time to keep the minds of Churchmen, as well as of politicians,
awake and active: and a good deal had been done to stem the tide of immorality which
had then broken over the kingdom. The Church of England was certainly not asleep
either in the time of the Seven Bishops, when James II. was King, or under its Whig
rulers at the end of the century. And in Queen Anne’s time, amid all the virulence of
hostile Church parties, there was a healthy stream of life which made itself very visible
in the numerous religious associations which sprang up everywhere in the great towns.
It might seem as if there were a certain heaviness in the English mind, which requires
some outward stimulus to keep alive its zeal. For so soon as the press of danger ceased,
and party strifes abated, with the accession of the House of Brunswick, Christianity
began forthwith to slumber. The trumpet of Wesley and Whitefield was needed before
that unseemly slumber could again be broken.
It will not, however, be forgotten that twice in successive generations the Church of
England had been deprived, through misfortune or through folly, of some of her best
men. She had suffered on either hand. By the ejection of 1602, through a too stringent
enforcement of the new Act of Uniformity, she had lost the services of some of the most
devoted of her Puritan sons, men whose views were in many cases no way
distinguishable from those which had been held without rebuke by some of the most
honoured bishops of Elizabeth’s time. By the ejection of 1689, through what was surely
a needless strain upon their allegiance, many high-minded men of a different order of
thought were driven, if not from her communion, at all events from her ministrations. It
was a juncture when the Church could ill afford to be weakened by the defection of some
of the most earnest and disinterested upholders of the Primitive and Catholic, as
contrasted with the more directly Protestant elements of her Constitution. This twofold
drain upon her strength could scarcely have failed to impair the robust vitality which
was soon to be so greatly needed to combat the early beginnings of the dead resistance
of spiritual lethargy.
But this listlessness in most branches of practical religion must partly be attributed to a
cause which gives the history of religious thought in the eighteenth century its principal
importance. In proportion as the Church Constitution approached its final settlement,
and as the controversies, which from the beginning of the Reformation had been
unceasingly under dispute, gradually wore themselves out, new questions came
forward, far more profound and fundamental, and far more important in their
speculative and practical bearings, than those which had attracted so much notice and
stirred so much excitement during the two preceding centuries. The existence of God
was scarcely called into question by the boldest doubters; or such doubts, if they found
place at all, were expressed only under the most covert implications. But, short of this,
all the mysteries of religion were scrutinized; all the deep and hidden things of faith
were brought in question, and submitted to the test of reason. Is there such a thing as a
revelation from God to men of Himself and of His will? If so, what is its nature, its
purposes, its limits? What are the attributes of God? What is the meaning of life? What is
man’s hereafter? Does a divine spirit work in man? and if it does, what are its
operations, and how are they distinguishable? What is spirit? and what is matter? What
does


