completely emancipated at the Reformation than it was at first at all
aware of. Men who were engaged in battling against certain definite
abuses, and certain specified errors, scarcely discovered at first,
nor indeed for long afterwards, that they were in reality contending
also for principles which would affect for the future the whole
groundwork of religious conviction. They were not yet in a position
to see that henceforward authority could take only a secondary place,
and that they were installing in its room either reason or a more
subtle spiritual faculty superior even to reason in the perception of
spiritual things. It was not until near the end of the seventeenth
century that the mind began to awaken to a full perception of the
freedom it had won — a freedom far more complete in principle than
was as yet allowed in practice. In the eighteenth century this
fundamental postulate of the Reformation became for the first time a
prominent, and, to many minds, an absorbing subject of inquiry. For
the first time it was no longer disguised from sight by the
incidental interest of its side issues. The assertors of the
supremacy of reason were at first arrogantly, or even insolently,
self-confident, as those who were secure of carrying all before them.
Gradually, the wiser of them began to feel that their ambition must
be largely moderated, and that they must be content with far more
negative results than they had at first imagined. The question came
to be, what is reason unable to do? What are its limits? and how is
it to be supplemented? An immensity of learning, and of arguments
good and bad, was lavished on either side in the controversy between
the deists and the orthodox. In the end, it may perhaps be said that
two axioms were established, which may sound in our own day like
commonplaces, but which were certainly very insufficiently realised
when the controversy began. It was seen on the one hand that reason
was free, and that on the other it was encompassed by limitations
against which it strives in vain. The Deists lost the day. Their
objections to revelation fell through; and Christianity rose again,
strengthened rather than weakened by their attack. Yet they had not
laboured in vain, if success may be measured, not by the gaining of
an immediate purpose, but by solid good effected, however contrary in
kind to the object proposed. So far as a man works with a single-
hearted desire to win truth, he should rejoice if his very errors are
made, in the hands of an overruling Providence, instrumental in
establishing truth. Christianity in England had arrived in the
eighteenth century at one of those periods of revision when it has
become absolutely necessary to examine the foundations of its
teaching, at any risk of temporary disturbance to the faith of
individuals. The advantage ultimately gained was twofold. It was not
only that the vital doctrines of Christian faith had been scrutinised
both by friends and enemies, and were felt to have stood the proof.
But also defenders of received doctrine learnt, almost insensibly,
very much from its opponents. They became aware — or if not they, at
all events their successors became aware — that orthodoxy must, in
some respects, modify the stringency of its conclusions; that there
was need, in other instances, of disentangling Christian verities
from the scholastic refinements which had gradually grown up around
them; and that there were many questions which might safely be left
open to debate without in any way impairing the real defences of
Christianity. A sixteenth or seventeenth-century theologian regarded
most religious questions from a standing point widely different in
general character from that of his equal in piety and learning in the
eighteenth century. The circumstances and tone of thought which


