MEMOIR OF JAMES BRAIDWOOD.
The history of mankind, from the earliest times, has been one of
alternate peace and war with fire. The immeasurable value of its
obedience, and the fearful consequences of its insubordination, have,
in all ages, made its due subjection one of the most important
conditions of even human existence itself. As camps and trading
stations grew into populous cities, the dangers of fire were both
multiplied and aggravated. Its ravages in the ancient capitals of the
world are matters of history; and it is established that something like
organization was extended to the means then employed for suppressing
conflagrations. Even the fire-engine itself, in a practicable, although
imperfect form, was described and illustrated by a sectional working
drawing, by Hero of Alexandria, in a book written by him more than one
hundred years before the Christian era. In its many translations, from
the original Greek into Latin and into modern tongues, Hero’s book,
with its remarkable series of drawings, still occupies a place in the
mechanical literature of our own time. But, although the construction
of the fire-engine was thus known two thousand years ago, we have no
actual evidence of its use until within the last two centuries; and
within the whole compass of English history, at least, we know that
nothing like discipline and organization, in the modern sense of the
terms, were introduced into the management of fire apparatus until a
time quite within the recollection of the middle-aged men of our own
day. If there be anything apparently improbable in this fact, we need
only recollect that many of the grandest triumphs of human genius, with
which we are already so familiar, are not yet forty years old. The
modern system of English fire brigades belongs wholly to the period of
railways, steam navigation, and electric telegraphs, and it owes nearly
all to the genius and disciplined heroism of a single individual, James
Braidwood, who, but little more than four years ago, fell—as nobly for
himself as sadly for others—at his chosen post of duty. What, when he
first gave his energies—indeed, his whole heart to it, was but the
rough and unskilful employment of the fireman, became under Mr.
Braidwood’s command and his infusing spirit of order and intelligence,
as distinguished from reckless daring, a noble pursuit, almost rising
in dignity to a profession, and indeed acknowledged as such by many,
and significantly, although indirectly, by Royalty itself.
Until the year 1833, not only the parish engines of the metropolis,
numbering, as they did, about three hundred, but the engines also of
the Fire Insurance Companies, were comparatively inefficient and often
out of order, while they were also under the most diverse, if not
irresponsible management. There were no really trained firemen, and
those who controlled and worked the engines were oftener in antagonism
with each other than acting in concert. The parish engines were in the
care of the beadles, and in one case a beadle’s widow, Mrs. Smith, for
some years commanded one of the city engines. The energies of each band
of firemen were commonly reserved for the protection of property only
in which their own insurance company or parish was immediately
interested. As a rule, whatever water was thrown upon a burning
building was dashed against the walls, windows, and roof from the
outside only, very little if any really reaching the actual seat of the
fire within. As a consequence, fires, which are now quickly “got
under,” were then left to burn themselves out, the spreading of the

fire being prevented either by deluging the contiguous buildings with
water, or by pulling them down altogether.
James Braidwood was born in Edinburgh in the year 1800. His father was
a well-known upholsterer and builder, who appears to have chosen for
his son the profession of a surveyor. To this end he was entered at the
High School, then under the rectorship of Mr. (afterwards Professor)
Pillans, and here, and subsequently under private masters, the youth
received a sound education in the branches most appropriate to his
intended pursuit in life. He was for some time engaged in his father’s
business, and thereby gained an amount of practical knowledge, which
was of, perhaps, as much service to him in his subsequent career as a
fireman, as it would have been had he adopted the profession originally
chosen for him. Young Braidwood was an apt student, a fact, perhaps,
sufficiently attested afterwards by his successful authorship, at the
age of thirty, of the only English work then extant upon the fire-
engine and its proper management. He read much, wrote well, was a good
draughtsman, and had a sound knowledge of mechanics. But whether his
powers required wider scope than a surveyor’s practice could offer, or
whether, more than forty years ago, and in Edinburgh, the chances of
professional success were very much less than now, James Braidwood soon
turned his mind to what became the great work of his life. He was
becoming known for activity and a high order of personal courage, and
there were those in place and power who saw in him the other elements
of character which go to make a successful leader of men. He was soon,
and when but twenty-three years of age, made the superintendent of the
Edinburgh fire engines, and he almost as soon began to reform their
inefficient and vicious system of management. He had held his post but
three weeks, however, when the series of fires broke forth which still
bear the name of the Great Fire of Edinburgh. Many of the old and lofty
houses in the High Street were destroyed, between four and five hundred
families were made houseless, ten persons were either killed outright
or fatally injured, and for several days nearly the whole of the High
Street, if not the larger part of the old town, was threatened with
destruction. Never were the consequences of want of organization more
conspicuous. There was no real command, for there were none to obey;
and while those who might have stopped the flames at the outset, wasted
their own energies in random efforts, or, perhaps, fell to quarrelling
among themselves, the fearful devastation rolled on. The occasion was
sufficient to induce the authorities and insurance companies to listen
to and profit by Mr. Braidwood’s recommendations. They consented to
bear in common the expenses necessary to organize and maintain an
efficient brigade. This was soon formed of picked men, who, although
daily engaged in their former ordinary occupations, were regularly
inspected, trained, and exercised early in one morning of every week.
Fires were becoming more and more numerous year by year; but the
influence of the improved system was soon felt. The men were taught to
improve to the utmost the first few minutes after an alarm was given,
and by constant emulation and discipline, a spirit of wonderful
readiness was cultivated in them. They were trained to seek out and
follow up the source of a fire before it had had time to spread, and to
throw the water from the engines directly upon it, instead of
wastefully, if not injuriously about. The result was, that while out of
forty-eight fires which happened in the first year of the history of
the brigade, eleven proved total losses, and twelve “considerable”

losses, the number of total losses decreased rapidly, year by year,
while the whole number of “calls” was almost as rapidly increasing.
Thus in the second year of the brigade there were eighty “calls,” of
which seven were total, and eighteen considerable losses. In the next
three years, with from ninety-four to one hundred and ninety-four
“calls” yearly, there was but one total loss in each year, and but from
nine to eighteen “considerable” losses.
Mr. Braidwood was meanwhile improving the fire-escapes, and when new
engines were added to the force, he procured better workmanship. By his
personal influence, also, more than by the mere advantage of official
position, Mr. Braidwood secured the constant co-operation of the police
in giving the earliest alarms of fire, and in facilitating the labours
of the firemen when actually on duty. As has just been shown, the
results of method, applied skill, and of a personal devotion cultivated
under the high impulse of immediate public observation and approval,
were soon manifest. To this vast improvement the _Edinburgh Mercury_,
as representing the opinion of the citizens of the Scottish capital,
bore public testimony in its issue of August 14, 1828, when the Fire
Brigade of that city had been tested by nearly five years of constant
trial, and with conspicuous success. Referring to the excellent
organization of the establishment, it was remarked that there were then
but few, if any, serious fires in Edinburgh, for when a fire broke out—
and the alarms were as frequent as ever—it was speedily checked. Said
the writer:–
“Not only is the apparatus constructed on the best possible
principles, but the whole system of operations has been changed.
The public, however, do not see the same bustle, or hear the same
noise as formerly; and hence they seem erroneously to conclude that
there is nothing done. The fact is, the spectator sees the
preparation for action made, but he sees no more. Where the
strength of the men and the supply of water used to be wasted, by
being thrown against windows, walls, and roofs, the firemen now
seek out the spot where the danger lies, and creeping on hands and
feet into a chamber full of flame, or smoke, often at the hazard of
suffocation, discover the exact seat of danger; and, by bringing
the water in contact with it, obtain immediate mastery over the
powerful element with which they have to contend. In this daring
and dangerous work men have occasionally fainted from heat, or
dropped down from want of respiration, in which cases the next
person at hand is always ready to assist his companion, and to
release him from his service of danger.”
In a fire which happened while Mr. Braidwood was at the head of the
Edinburgh Brigade, he won great admiration by bringing out from the
burning building a quantity of gunpowder which was known to be stored
there. He would not ask any of his men to undertake this dangerous
feat, but, amidst the breathless suspense of thousands of spectators,
he coolly searched for and safely carried out, first one, and then a
second, cask of this explosive material. Had the fire reached the
powder, it was known that the worst consequences of the conflagration
would have been immensely increased.
The fame of the Edinburgh Brigade rapidly spread throughout the

kingdom, and it gradually became regarded as a model to which all other
organizations for the suppression of fires would ultimately be made to
conform. As a response to constant inquiries from a distance, Mr.
Braidwood, in 1829, forwarded to the Society of Arts, London, a
description of his chain-ladder fire-escape. For this invaluable
apparatus, which had already effected a considerable saving of life,
the Society’s Silver Medal was awarded, and, accompanying the award,
the Council of the Society extended an invitation to the author to
“give a complete account of his mode of drilling firemen, and combining
the use of fire-escapes with the ordinary fire-engine service.”
Responding to this invitation, Mr. Braidwood in the following year
published his work “On the Construction of Fire-Engines and Apparatus,
the Training of Firemen, and the Method of Proceeding in Cases of
Fire.” From this work, which may still be regarded as an authority,
extensive extracts have been made in the subsequent chapters of the
present volume, and it need not, therefore, be further referred to here
than to say that it formed a thoroughly original account of an original
system, and that its illustrations, which were especially clear, were
drawn by the author’s own hand. This work attracted much attention from
municipal bodies and insurance companies throughout the kingdom, and
more than one official deputation visited Edinburgh to learn from Mr.
Braidwood himself the details of a system which was already working
such important results. In London, especially, three West India
warehouses had been burnt in the year 1829, with a loss of 300,000_l._;
and with the extending use of gas, the increasing frequency of fires,
and the conspicuous inefficiency of the parish engines, and the want of
unity of action among the insurance companies, it was felt that what
had answered so well in Edinburgh would prove still more valuable in
the metropolis. The general estimation in which Mr. Braidwood’s
services were then held may be considered as expressed in the
following, among other contemporary reviews of his book:–
“The Edinburgh Fire-engine Establishment is now all but perfect. A
unity of system has been accomplished, and a corps of firemen
mustered, who, in point of physical vigour and moral intrepidity,
are all entitled to be denominated chosen men. At the head of this
band stands Mr. Braidwood, an individual who has on several
occasions given abundant evidence of promptitude in extremity, and
a noble contempt of personal danger, and whose enthusiasm, in what
we may call his profession, could not have been more strikingly
exemplified than by his illustrating it in the manner we now see
before us. It is the only book we are acquainted with that treats
of the systematic training of firemen; and from the perspicuity of
its details, it must necessarily become the manual of all such
institutions, and ought to find a place in every insurance office
in the United Kingdom.”
It had been from time to time attempted to bring the fire apparatus of
the London Insurance Companies under a single management; but it was
nearly ten years after the establishment of the Edinburgh Fire Brigade,
and only when Mr. Braidwood himself had been invited to come to London,
that this was at last effected. As for the parish engines, they were
wholly neglected under this arrangement, and, indeed, a great number of
them had been already allowed to fall into disuse, as far as could be
permitted without incurring the penalties of the Statutes of 1774. On

the 1st January, 1833, at the instance of Mr. Ford, of the Sun Fire-office, eight of the
insurance companies formed an association of fire-engines and firemen, each company
withholding its own distinctive name and badges from the united force. This was known as
the London Fire-engine Establishment. It was supported by the companies in common, each
in proportion to the premiums received from its business in London, a minimum rate being
fixed. Each company contributing to the support of the establishment nominated one
member of the committee of management. This association existed for thirty-three years,
when on the 1st of January, 1866, the Metropolitan Board of Works took charge of the
fire-engines and the general fire establishment of the metropolis. Mr. Braidwood took the
command of the London Brigade thus formed at the onset. The Edinburgh Fire-engine
Committee, on accepting his resignation, presented him with a gold watch, and a vote of
thanks, “for the singularly indefatigable manner in which he had discharged the duties of
his important office, not merely by his extraordinary exertions on occasions of emergency,
but for the care and attention he had bestowed on the training of the firemen, whereby the
establishment had been brought to its present high state of efficiency.” He had previously
received from the men under him a handsome silver cup, bearing the following inscription:—
”Presented to Mr. James Braidwood, by the City of Edinburgh Firemen, as a token of their
admiration of him as their leader, and of deep respect for him as a gentleman.”
As in Edinburgh, the London Fire Brigade under Mr. Braidwood’s superintendence became a
new force, and in every respect a remarkable organization. Where the inefficiency of the
old firemen could not at once be made to yield to discipline, they were pensioned off; and
within a short time a select band of active, hardy, and thoroughly trained men was formed.
In 1834, the second year of Mr. Braidwood’s superintendence, the Houses of Parliament
were burnt; and a most destructive fire occurred also at Mile-end. The first-named fire
created general consternation, and there are many persons who can still recollect that also
at Mile-end. These great fires stimulated Mr. Braidwood to increased exertions, and the
result was soon visible in the lessened proportion of totally destroyed premises to the whole
number of fires. The brigade had, of course, no power of prevention, and alarms of fire
were becoming more numerous than ever. The use of friction matches and of gas was
increasing enormously; manufactures, and the steam-engines and machinery for conducting
them, were being rapidly multiplied; and with the vast progress making in the production of
cotton goods, the use of cotton curtains and bed-furniture was becoming common in
dwellings forming a large proportion of the metropolis, but in which, not long before, such
articles were either regarded as luxuries or were altogether unknown. The total number of
fires attended by the brigade in the year 1833, exclusive of chimneys on fire, was 458,
while in 1851 the number had risen to 928; and although London had been growing all this
time, it had not doubled in size to correspond with the increased number of fires. But while
the total yearly number of fires, since the formation of the brigade, has shown a large and
hardly interrupted increase, the number of cases of total destruction has almost as steadily
diminished. Thus, “totally destroyed” was reported of 31 fires in the year 1833, whereas in
1839 there were but 17 cases, and the average for twenty-one years, from 1833 to 1853
inclusive, was but 25-1/2 yearly, while at the present


