fire being prevented either by deluging the contiguous buildings with water, or
by pulling them down altogether.
James Braidwood was born in Edinburgh in the year 1800. His father was a
well-known upholsterer and builder, who appears to have chosen for his son
the profession of a surveyor. To this end he was entered at the High School,
then under the rectorship of Mr. (afterwards Professor) Pillans, and here, and
subsequently under private masters, the youth received a sound education in
the branches most appropriate to his intended pursuit in life. He was for some
time engaged in his father’s business, and thereby gained an amount of
practical knowledge, which was of, perhaps, as much service to him in his
subsequent career as a fireman, as it would have been had he adopted the
profession originally chosen for him. Young Braidwood was an apt student, a
fact, perhaps, sufficiently attested afterwards by his successful authorship, at
the age of thirty, of the only English work then extant upon the fire-engine and
its proper management. He read much, wrote well, was a good draughtsman,
and had a sound knowledge of mechanics. But whether his powers required
wider scope than a surveyor’s practice could offer, or whether, more than forty
years ago, and in Edinburgh, the chances of professional success were very
much less than now, James Braidwood soon turned his mind to what became
the great work of his life. He was becoming known for activity and a high order
of personal courage, and there were those in place and power who saw in him
the other elements of character which go to make a successful leader of men.
He was soon, and when but twenty-three years of age, made the superintendent
of the Edinburgh fire engines, and he almost as soon began to reform their
inefficient and vicious system of management. He had held his post but three
weeks, however, when the series of fires broke forth which still bear the name of
the Great Fire of Edinburgh. Many of the old and lofty houses in the High Street
were destroyed, between four and five hundred families were made houseless,
ten persons were either killed outright or fatally injured, and for several days
nearly the whole of the High Street, if not the larger part of the old town, was
threatened with destruction. Never were the consequences of want of
organization more conspicuous. There was no real command, for there were
none to obey; and while those who might have stopped the flames at the outset,
wasted their own energies in random efforts, or, perhaps, fell to quarrelling
among themselves, the fearful devastation rolled on. The occasion was sufficient
to induce the authorities and insurance companies to listen to and profit by Mr.
Braidwood’s recommendations. They consented to bear in common the
expenses necessary to organize and maintain an efficient brigade. This was
soon formed of picked men, who, although daily engaged in their former
ordinary occupations, were regularly inspected, trained, and exercised early in
one morning of every week. Fires were becoming more and more numerous year
by year; but the influence of the improved system was soon felt. The men were
taught to improve to the utmost the first few minutes after an alarm was given,
and by constant emulation and discipline, a spirit of wonderful readiness was
cultivated in them. They were trained to seek out and follow up the source of a
fire before it had had time to spread, and to throw the water from the engines
directly upon it, instead of wastefully, if not injuriously about. The result was,
that while out of forty-eight fires which happened in the first year of the history
of the brigade, eleven proved total losses, and twelve “considerable”


