MEMOIR OF JAMES BRAIDWOOD.
The history of mankind, from the earliest times, has been one of alternate peace and war
with fire. The immeasurable value of its obedience, and the fearful consequences of its
insubordination, have, in all ages, made its due subjection one of the most important
conditions of even human existence itself. As camps and trading stations grew into
populous cities, the dangers of fire were both multiplied and aggravated. Its ravages in the
ancient capitals of the world are matters of history; and it is established that something like
organization was extended to the means then employed for suppressing conflagrations.
Even the fire-engine itself, in a practicable, although imperfect form, was described and
illustrated by a sectional working drawing, by Hero of Alexandria, in a book written by
him more than one hundred years before the Christian era. In its many translations, from
the original Greek into Latin and into modern tongues, Hero’s book, with its remarkable
series of drawings, still occupies a place in the mechanical literature of our own time. But,
although the construction of the fire-engine was thus known two thousand years ago, we
have no actual evidence of its use until within the last two centuries; and within the whole
compass of English history, at least, we know that nothing like discipline and organization,
in the modern sense of the terms, were introduced into the management of fire apparatus
until a time quite within the recollection of the middle-aged men of our own day. If there
be anything apparently improbable in this fact, we need only recollect that many of the
grandest triumphs of human genius, with which we are already so familiar, are not yet forty
years old. The modern system of English fire brigades belongs wholly to the period of
railways, steam navigation, and electric telegraphs, and it owes nearly all to the genius and
disciplined heroism of a single individual, James Braidwood, who, but little more than four
years ago, fell—as nobly for himself as sadly for others—at his chosen post of duty. What,
when he first gave his energies—indeed, his whole heart to it, was but the rough and
unskilful employment of the fireman, became under Mr. Braidwood’s command and his
infusing spirit of order and intelligence, as distinguished from reckless daring, a noble
pursuit, almost rising in dignity to a profession, and indeed acknowledged as such by
many, and significantly, although indirectly, by Royalty itself.
Until the year 1833, not only the parish engines of the metropolis, numbering, as they did,
about three hundred, but the engines also of the Fire Insurance Companies, were
comparatively inefficient and often out of order, while they were also under the most
diverse, if not irresponsible management. There were no really trained firemen, and those
who controlled and worked the engines were oftener in antagonism with each other than
acting in concert. The parish engines were in the care of the beadles, and in one case a
beadle’s widow, Mrs. Smith, for some years commanded one of the city engines. The
energies of each band of firemen were commonly reserved for the protection of property
only in which their own insurance company or parish was immediately interested. As a
rule, whatever water was thrown upon a burning building was dashed against the walls,
windows, and roof from the outside only, very little if any really reaching the actual seat of
the fire within. As a consequence, fires, which are now quickly “got under,” were then left
to burn themselves out, the spreading of the


