losses, the number of total losses decreased rapidly, year by year, while the whole number of “calls”
was almost as rapidly increasing. Thus in the second year of the brigade there were eighty “calls,” of
which seven were total, and eighteen considerable losses. In the next three years, with from ninety-
four to one hundred and ninety-four “calls” yearly, there was but one total loss in each year, and but
from nine to eighteen “considerable” losses.
Mr. Braidwood was meanwhile improving the fire-escapes, and when new engines were added to the
force, he procured better workmanship. By his personal influence, also, more than by the mere
advantage of official position, Mr. Braidwood secured the constant co-operation of the police in
giving the earliest alarms of fire, and in facilitating the labours of the firemen when actually on duty.
As has just been shown, the results of method, applied skill, and of a personal devotion cultivated
under the high impulse of immediate public observation and approval, were soon manifest. To this
vast improvement the _Edinburgh Mercury_, as representing the opinion of the citizens of the
Scottish capital, bore public testimony in its issue of August 14, 1828, when the Fire Brigade of that
city had been tested by nearly five years of constant trial, and with conspicuous success. Referring to
the excellent organization of the establishment, it was remarked that there were then but few, if any,
serious fires in Edinburgh, for when a fire broke out—and the alarms were as frequent as ever—it
was speedily checked. Said the writer:-
“Not only is the apparatus constructed on the best possible principles, but the whole system
of operations has been changed. The public, however, do not see the same bustle, or hear the
same noise as formerly; and hence they seem erroneously to conclude that there is nothing
done. The fact is, the spectator sees the preparation for action made, but he sees no more.
Where the strength of the men and the supply of water used to be wasted, by being thrown
against windows, walls, and roofs, the firemen now seek out the spot where the danger lies,
and creeping on hands and feet into a chamber full of flame, or smoke, often at the hazard of
suffocation, discover the exact seat of danger; and, by bringing the water in contact with it,
obtain immediate mastery over the powerful element with which they have to contend. In this
daring and dangerous work men have occasionally fainted from heat, or dropped down from
want of respiration, in which cases the next person at hand is always ready to assist his
companion, and to release him from his service of danger.”
In a fire which happened while Mr. Braidwood was at the head of the Edinburgh Brigade, he won
great admiration by bringing out from the burning building a quantity of gunpowder which was
known to be stored there. He would not ask any of his men to undertake this dangerous feat, but,
amidst the breathless suspense of thousands of spectators, he coolly searched for and safely carried
out, first one, and then a second, cask of this explosive material. Had the fire reached the powder, it
was known that the worst consequences of the conflagration would have been immensely increased.
The fame of the Edinburgh Brigade rapidly spread throughout the


