the 1st January, 1833, at the instance of Mr. Ford, of the Sun Fire-office, eight of the
insurance companies formed an association of fire-engines and firemen, each
company withholding its own distinctive name and badges from the united force. This
was known as the London Fire-engine Establishment. It was supported by the
companies in common, each in proportion to the premiums received from its
business in London, a minimum rate being fixed. Each company contributing to the
support of the establishment nominated one member of the committee of
management. This association existed for thirty-three years, when on the 1st of
January, 1866, the Metropolitan Board of Works took charge of the fire-engines and
the general fire establishment of the metropolis. Mr. Braidwood took the command of
the London Brigade thus formed at the onset. The Edinburgh Fire-engine Committee,
on accepting his resignation, presented him with a gold watch, and a vote of thanks,
“for the singularly indefatigable manner in which he had discharged the duties of his
important office, not merely by his extraordinary exertions on occasions of
emergency, but for the care and attention he had bestowed on the training of the
firemen, whereby the establishment had been brought to its present high state of
efficiency.” He had previously received from the men under him a handsome silver
cup, bearing the following inscription:—”Presented to Mr. James Braidwood, by the
City of Edinburgh Firemen, as a token of their admiration of him as their leader, and
of deep respect for him as a gentleman.”
As in Edinburgh, the London Fire Brigade under Mr. Braidwood’s superintendence
became a new force, and in every respect a remarkable organization. Where the
inefficiency of the old firemen could not at once be made to yield to discipline, they
were pensioned off; and within a short time a select band of active, hardy, and
thoroughly trained men was formed. In 1834, the second year of Mr. Braidwood’s
superintendence, the Houses of Parliament were burnt; and a most destructive fire
occurred also at Mile-end. The first-named fire created general consternation, and
there are many persons who can still recollect that also at Mile-end. These great fires
stimulated Mr. Braidwood to increased exertions, and the result was soon visible in
the lessened proportion of totally destroyed premises to the whole number of fires.
The brigade had, of course, no power of prevention, and alarms of fire were
becoming more numerous than ever. The use of friction matches and of gas was
increasing enormously; manufactures, and the steam-engines and machinery for
conducting them, were being rapidly multiplied; and with the vast progress making
in the production of cotton goods, the use of cotton curtains and bed-furniture was
becoming common in dwellings forming a large proportion of the metropolis, but in
which, not long before, such articles were either regarded as luxuries or were
altogether unknown. The total number of fires attended by the brigade in the year
1833, exclusive of chimneys on fire, was 458, while in 1851 the number had risen to
928; and although London had been growing all this time, it had not doubled in size
to correspond with the increased number of fires. But while the total yearly number
of fires, since the formation of the brigade, has shown a large and hardly interrupted
increase, the number of cases of total destruction has almost as steadily diminished.
Thus, “totally destroyed” was reported of 31 fires in the year 1833, whereas in 1839
there were but 17 cases, and the average for twenty-one years, from 1833 to 1853
inclusive, was but 25-1/2 yearly, while at the present


