kingdom, and it gradually became regarded as a model to which all other organizations for
the suppression of fires would ultimately be made to conform. As a response to constant
inquiries from a distance, Mr. Braidwood, in 1829, forwarded to the Society of Arts,
London, a description of his chain-ladder fire-escape. For this invaluable apparatus, which
had already effected a considerable saving of life, the Society’s Silver Medal was awarded,
and, accompanying the award, the Council of the Society extended an invitation to the
author to “give a complete account of his mode of drilling firemen, and combining the use
of fire-escapes with the ordinary fire-engine service.” Responding to this invitation, Mr.
Braidwood in the following year published his work “On the Construction of Fire-Engines
and Apparatus, the Training of Firemen, and the Method of Proceeding in Cases of Fire.”
From this work, which may still be regarded as an authority, extensive extracts have been
made in the subsequent chapters of the present volume, and it need not, therefore, be
further referred to here than to say that it formed a thoroughly original account of an
original system, and that its illustrations, which were especially clear, were drawn by the
author’s own hand. This work attracted much attention from municipal bodies and
insurance companies throughout the kingdom, and more than one official deputation
visited Edinburgh to learn from Mr. Braidwood himself the details of a system which was
already working such important results. In London, especially, three West India
warehouses had been burnt in the year 1829, with a loss of 300,000_l._; and with the
extending use of gas, the increasing frequency of fires, and the conspicuous inefficiency of
the parish engines, and the want of unity of action among the insurance companies, it was
felt that what had answered so well in Edinburgh would prove still more valuable in the
metropolis. The general estimation in which Mr. Braidwood’s services were then held may
be considered as expressed in the following, among other contemporary reviews of his
book:-
“The Edinburgh Fire-engine Establishment is now all but perfect. A unity of system
has been accomplished, and a corps of firemen mustered, who, in point of physical
vigour and moral intrepidity, are all entitled to be denominated chosen men. At the
head of this band stands Mr. Braidwood, an individual who has on several occasions
given abundant evidence of promptitude in extremity, and a noble contempt of
personal danger, and whose enthusiasm, in what we may call his profession, could
not have been more strikingly exemplified than by his illustrating it in the manner we
now see before us. It is the only book we are acquainted with that treats of the
systematic training of firemen; and from the perspicuity of its details, it must
necessarily become the manual of all such institutions, and ought to find a place in
every insurance office in the United Kingdom.”
It had been from time to time attempted to bring the fire apparatus of the London Insurance
Companies under a single management; but it was nearly ten years after the establishment
of the Edinburgh Fire Brigade, and only when Mr. Braidwood himself had been invited to
come to London, that this was at last effected. As for the parish engines, they were wholly
neglected under this arrangement, and, indeed, a great number of them had been already
allowed to fall into disuse, as far as could be permitted without incurring the penalties of
the Statutes of 1774. On


