Our Women are Straight Lines.
Our Soldiers and Lowest Classes of Workmen are Triangles with two equal sides, each
about eleven inches long, and a base or third side so short (often not exceeding half an
inch) that they form at their vertices a very sharp and formidable angle. Indeed when
their bases are of the most degraded type (not more than the eighth part of an inch in
size), they can hardly be distinguished from Straight Lines or Women; so extremely
pointed are their vertices. With us, as with you, these Triangles are distinguished from
others by being called Isosceles; and by this name I shall refer to them in the following
pages.
Our Middle Class consists of Equilateral or Equal-sided Triangles.
Our Professional Men and Gentlemen are Squares (to which class I myself belong) and
Five-sided figures or Pentagons.
Next above these come the Nobility, of whom there are several degrees, beginning at
Six-sided Figures, or Hexagons, and from thence rising in the number of their sides till they
receive the honourable title of Polygonal, or many-sided. Finally when the number of the
sides becomes so numerous, and the sides themselves so small, that the figure cannot be
distinguished from a circle, he is included in the Circular or Priestly order; and this is the
highest class of all.
It is a Law of Nature with us that a male child shall have one more side than his father, so
that each generation shall rise (as a rule) one step in the scale of development and
nobility. Thus the son of a Square is a Pentagon; the son of a Pentagon, a Hexagon; and
so on.
But this rule applies not always to the Tradesmen, and still less often to the Soldiers, and to
the Workmen; who indeed can hardly be said to deserve the name of human Figures,
since they have not all their sides equal. With them therefore the Law of Nature does not
hold; and the son of an Isosceles (i.e. a Triangle with two sides equal) remains Isosceles
still. Nevertheless, all hope is not shut out, even from the Isosceles, that his posterity may
ultimately rise above his degraded condition. For, after a long series of military successes,
or diligent and skilful labours, it is generally found that the more intelligent among the
Artisan and Soldier classes manifest a slight increase of their third side or base, and a
shrinkage of the two other sides. Intermarriages (arranged by the Priests) between the
sons and daughters of these more intellectual members of the lower classes generally
result in an offspring approximating still more to the type of the Equal-sided Triangle.
Rarely—in proportion to the vast number of Isosceles births—is a genuine and certifiable
Equal-sided Triangle produced from Isosceles parents.[1] Such a birth requires, as its
antecedents, not only a series of carefully arranged intermarriages, but also a long-
continued exercise of frugality and self-control on the part of the would-be ancestors of
the coming Equilateral, and a patient, systematic, and continuous development of the
Isosceles intellect through many generations.


