The birth of a True Equilateral Triangle from Isosceles parents is the subject of rejoicing in our
country for many furlongs round. After a strict examination conducted by the Sanitary and Social
Board, the infant, if certified as Regular, is with solemn ceremonial admitted into the class of
Equilaterals. He is then immediately taken from his proud yet sorrowing parents and adopted by
some childless Equilateral, who is bound by oath never to permit the child henceforth to enter
his former home or so much as to look upon his relations again, for fear lest the freshly
developed organism may, by force of unconscious imitation, fall back again into his hereditary
level.
The occasional emergence of an Isosceles from the ranks of his serf-born ancestors, is welcomed
not only by the poor serfs themselves, as a gleam of light and hope shed upon the monotonous
squalor of their existence, but also by the Aristocracy at large; for all the higher classes are well
aware that these rare phenomena, while they do little or nothing to vulgarise their own
privileges, serve as a most useful barrier against revolution from below.
Had the acute-angled rabble been all, without exception, absolutely destitute of hope and of
ambition, they might have found leaders in some of their many seditious outbreaks, so able as
to render their superior numbers and strength too much even for the wisdom of the Circles. But
a wise ordinance of Nature has decreed that, in proportion as the working-classes increase in
intelligence, knowledge, and all virtue, in that same proportion their acute angle (which makes
them physically terrible) shall increase also and approximate to the harmless angle of the
Equilateral Triangle. Thus, in the most brutal and formidable of the soldier class creatures
almost on a level with women in their lack of intelligence—it is found that, as they wax in the
mental ability necessary to employ their tremendous penetrating power to advantage, so do
they wane in the power of penetration itself.
How admirable is this Law of Compensation! And how perfect a proof of the natural fitness and,
I may almost say, the divine origin of the aristocratic constitution of the States in Flatland! By a
judicious use of this Law of Nature, the Polygons and Circles are almost always able to stifle
sedition in its very cradle, taking advantage of the irrepressible and boundless hopefulness of
the human mind. Art also comes to the aid of Law and Order. It is generally found possible—by a
little artificial compression or expansion on the part of the State physicians—to make some of
the more intelligent leaders of a rebellion perfectly Regular, and to admit them at once into the
privileged classes; a much larger number, who are still below the standard, allured by the
prospect of being ultimately ennobled, are induced to enter the State Hospitals, where they are
kept in honourable confinement for life; one or two alone of the more obstinate, foolish, and
hopelessly irregular are led to execution.
Then the wretched rabble of the Isosceles, planless and leaderless, are either transfixed without
resistance by the small body of their brethren whom the Chief Circle keeps in pay for
emergencies of this kind; or else more often, by means of jealousies and suspicions skilfully
fomented among them by the Circular party, they are stirred to mutual warfare, and perish by
one another’s angles. No less than one


