distance you see none of these (unless indeed your sun shines bright upon
them revealing the projections and retirements by means of light and shade),
nothing but a grey unbroken line upon the water.
Well, that is just what we see when one of our triangular or other
acquaintances comes towards us in Flatland. As there is neither sun with us,
nor any light of such a kind as to make shadows, we have none of the helps to
the sight that you have in Spaceland. If our friend comes close to us we see his
line becomes larger; if he leaves us it becomes smaller: but still he looks like a
straight line; be he a Triangle, Square, Pentagon, Hexagon, Circle, what you
will—a straight Line he looks and nothing else.
You may perhaps ask how under these disadvantageous circumstances we are
able to distinguish our friends from one another: but the answer to this very
natural question will be more fitly and easily given when I come to describe the
inhabitants of Flatland. For the present let me defer this subject, and say a
word or two about the climate and houses in our country.
§ 2.—Of the climate and houses in Flatland.
As with you, so also with us, there are four points of the compass North, South,
East, and West.
There being no sun nor other heavenly bodies, it is impossible for us to
determine the North in the usual way; but we have a method of our own. By a
Law of Nature with us, there is a constant attraction to the South; and,
although in temperate climates this is very slight—so that even a Woman in
reasonable health can journey several furlongs northward without much
difficulty—yet the hampering effect of the southward attraction is quite
sufficient to serve as a compass in most parts of our earth. Moreover the rain
(which falls at stated intervals) coming always from the North, is an additional
assistance; and in the towns we have the guidance of the houses, which of
course have their side-walls running for the most part North and South, so that
the roofs may keep off the rain from the North. In the country, where there are
no houses, the trunks of the trees serve as some sort of guide. Altogether, we
have not so much difficulty as might be expected in determining our bearings.
Yet in our more temperate regions, in which the southward attraction is hardly
felt, walking sometimes in a perfectly desolate plain where there have been no
houses nor trees to guide me, I have been occasionally compelled to remain
stationary for hours together, waiting till the rain came before continuing my
journey. On the weak and aged, and especially on delicate Females, the force of
attraction tells much more heavily than on the robust of the Male Sex, so that it
is a point of breeding, if you meet a Lady in the street, always to give her the
North side of the way—by no means an easy thing to do always at short notice
when you are in rude health and in a climate where it is difficult to tell your
North from your South.
Windows there are none in our houses: for the light comes to us alike


